When doctors take a person’s blood pressure, they measure the force that blood exerts on the walls of the arteries as it flows through them
If blood pressure is too high for too long, it can cause serious damage to the blood vessels.

This can lead to various complications, some of which can be life threatening 
They include:
heart failure
vision loss
stroke
kidney disease
There are ways of managing high blood pressure, or hypertension 
The condition does not often cause symptoms, but regular screening can help a person know if preventive measures are necessary.

The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) estimates that high blood pressure affects around 45% of adults in the U.S
In this chatbot, we look at the causes of high blood pressure and how to treat it
We also explain the blood pressure measurements that health authorities consider to be typical or too high.

What is high blood pressure?
A condition in which the force of the blood against the artery walls is too high Also called: HBP, hypertension
Usually hypertension is defined as blood pressure above 140/90, and is considered severe if the pressure is above 180/120,
High blood pressure often has no symptoms. Over time, if untreated, it can cause health conditions, such as heart disease and stroke,
Eating a healthier diet with less salt, exercising regularly and taking medication can help lower blood pressure,
The heart is a muscle that pumps blood around the body As it travels, the blood delivers oxygen to the body’s vital organs.

Sometimes, a problem in the body makes it harder for the heart to pump blood 
For example, this could occur if an artery becomes too narrow.

Persistent high blood pressure can place strain on the walls of the arteries. 
This can lead to various health problems, some of which can be life threatening.

Doctors measure blood pressure in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).

There are two parts to a blood pressure measurement: 
Systolic pressure, the top number on a blood pressure reading, 
is the blood pressure when the heart contracts 
Diastolic pressure is the blood pressure between heartbeats
It is the lower number of the measurement and represents the blood pressure when the heart rests between beats.

Therefore, if blood pressure is 120/80 mm Hg, the systolic pressure is 120 mm Hg and the diastolic pressure is 80 mm Hg.

A blood pressure monitor works by stopping the blood flow, 
usually to the lower arm, and then letting it start again
If a doctor uses a manual sphygmomanometer with a stethoscope, 
they will not hear any sounds until the blood starts to flow 
The first sound they will hear is when the pressure approaches systolic blood pressure
When the sound disappears again, it marks diastolic blood pressure.

The table below shows how doctors interpret a person’s blood pressure:
Systolic (mm Hg)	Diastolic (mm Hg)
Typical	Below 120	Below 80
Elevated (hypertension)	120–129	Below 80
Stage 1 hypertension	130–139	80–90
Stage 2 hypertension	140 or above	90 or above
Hypertensive crisis	Over 180	Over 120
What is typical blood pressure? 
You can buy a blood pressure monitor for home use here.

Signs and symptoms
Most people with high blood pressure will not experience any symptoms, 
which is why people often call hypertension the “silent killer”

However, once blood pressure reaches about 180/120 mm Hg, it becomes a hypertensive crisis, 
which constitutes a medical emergency

At this stage, a person may have:
a headache
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
blurred or double vision
nosebleeds
heart palpitations
breathlessness
Anybody who experiences these symptoms should seek immediate medical attention.

Symptoms in females
Hormonal factors mean that the risk of high blood pressure may be different in males and females

Factors that can increase the risk of high blood pressure in females include:
pregnancy
menopause
using birth control pills
During pregnancy, high blood pressure can indicate preeclampsia, a potentially dangerous condition that can affect both the person and their fetus.

Symptoms of preeclampsia include:
headaches
vision changes
abdominal pain
swelling due to edema
All people should follow the guidelines for screening and attend all health checks, especially during pregnancy.

Is menopause a key risk factor?
Research Source shows that before middle age, males are more likely to experience high blood pressure than females
Then, around the time of menopause, the reverse becomes true
However, health experts disagree on whether this is due to menopause

Some argue that, until menopause, hormonal factors — and specifically the presence of estrogen — helps protect people from high blood pressure
When menopause occurs, individuals lose this protection, 
effectively making menopause the main risk factor for cardiovascular disease among females
However, some suggest that other factors may increase the risk around this time, such as increased body mass index, aging, and dietary changes, 
whether hormonal changes also play a role or not.

Symptoms in teens and people in their early 20s
Teenagers can develop high blood pressure due to obesity or an underlying medical condition

Possible medical factors includeTrusted Source:
aspects of metabolic conditions, such as type 2 diabetes
kidney disease
endocrine disease, which affects the hormones
vascular disease, which affects the blood vessels
a neurological condition
These conditions may have symptoms of their own
The symptoms of high blood pressure, if they occur, will be the same as for other groups.

A 2021 study Trusted Source notes that, while death rates from cardiovascular disease have fallen among older adults, the reduction has been less dramatic in those aged 18–39 years
The author suggests there are lower rates of awareness, treatment, and management of high blood pressure in those aged 20–39. With this in mind, 
they call for more effective identification of high blood pressure in these age groups to help reduce the risk of cardiovascular problems later in life.

Symptoms in children
High blood pressure can affect children 
Having obesity and diabetes increases the risk, but other underlying causes include:

a tumor
heart problems
kidney problems
obstructive sleep apnea
a rheumatologic disorder
thyroid problems
a genetic condition, such as Cushing’s syndrome
the use of certain drugs
a diet high in fat and salt
As with adults, high blood pressure does not often cause symptoms in children

However, if they occur, they may include:
a headache
fatigue
cognitive changes or changes in mental status
vomiting
These symptoms are likely to indicate severe hypertension.

Symptoms in babies
Newborns and very young babies can sometimes have high blood pressure due to an underlying health condition, 
such as kidney or heart disease
Clinical tests may show Trusted Source there are problems with blood pressure or the cardiopulmonary system.

Any symptoms may be non-specific or not noticeable, 
or hypertension may occur alongside symptoms of other conditions.

An infant with high blood pressure may also experience:
seizures
irritability
lethargy
feeding problems
rapid breathing
apnea
Other symptoms will depend on the condition causing the high blood pressure.

Causes
High blood pressure can occur when certain changes happen in the body or if a person 
is born with specific genetic features that cause a health condition
It can affect people with:
obesity
type 2 diabetes
kidney disease
obstructive sleep apnea
lupus
scleroderma
underactive or overactive thyroid
congenital conditions, such as Cushing’s syndrome, acromegaly, or pheochromocytoma
Sometimes, there is no apparent cause. In this case, a doctor will diagnose primary hypertension
Consuming a low fat diet, maintaining a moderate weight, reducing alcohol consumption, 
stopping smoking tobacco, will help lower the risk of high blood pressure.

How to lower blood pressure
Treatment will depend on several factors, 
including how high the blood pressure is and the risk of cardiovascular disease or a stroke

The doctor will recommend different treatments as blood pressure increases
For slightly high blood pressure, they may suggest making lifestyle changes and monitoring the blood pressure

If blood pressure is high, they will recommend medication
The options may change over time, according to how severe the hypertension is and whether complications arise, 
such as kidney disease. Some people may also need a combination of several different medications.

Medications
Conventional drugsTrusted Source for treating high blood pressure include:
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors block the actions of some hormones that regulate blood pressure, such as angiotensin II
Angiotensin II causes the arteries to constrict and increases blood volume, increasing blood pressure
ACE inhibitors can reduce the blood supply to the kidneys, making them less effective
As a result, people taking them need to undergo regular blood tests
Additionally, individuals should not use ACE inhibitors if they are pregnant or have a condition that affects the blood supply to the kidneys.

ACE inhibitors may cause the following side effects, which usually resolve after a few days:
dizziness
fatigue
weakness
headaches
a persistent dry cough
If the side effects are persistent or too unpleasant to manage, a doctor may prescribe an angiotensin II receptor antagonist instead
These alternative medications often cause fewer side effects, but they may include dizziness, headaches, and increased potassium levels in the blood.

Calcium channel blockers
Calcium channel blockers (CCBs) aim to decrease calcium levels in the blood vessels
This will relax the vascular smooth muscle, 
causing the muscle to contract less forcefully, the arteries to widen, and blood pressure to reduce
However, CCBs may not always be suitable for people with a history of heart disease, 
liver disease, or blood circulation issues
A doctor can advise on taking CCBs and which type is safe to use.

The following side effects may occur with CCBs, but they usually resolve after a few days:
skin redness, generally on the cheeks or neck
headaches
swollen ankles and feet
dizziness
fatigue
skin rash
swollen abdomen, in rare cases
Learn more about CCBs
Thiazide diuretics
Thiazide diuretics help the kidneys remove sodium and water, lowering blood volume and pressure.

The following side effects of taking them can occur, and some may persist:
low blood potassium, which can affect heart and kidney function
impaired glucose tolerance
erectile dysfunction
People taking thiazide diuretics should undergo regular blood and urine tests to monitor their blood sugar and potassium levels.

Beta-blockers
Beta-blockers were once popular for treating hypertension, but doctors now only tend to prescribe them when other treatments are ineffective
These medications slow the heart rate and reduce the force of the heartbeat, causing a drop in blood pressure.

Side effects from beta-blockers may include:
fatigue
cold hands and feet
slow heartbeat
nausea
diarrhea
Less common side effects are:
disturbed sleep
nightmares
erectile dysfunction
Beta-blockers are often the standard medication for a person with very high blood pressure, known as a hypertensive crisis.

Renin inhibitors
Aliskiren (Tekturna, Rasilez) reduces the production of renin, an enzyme that the kidneys produce
Renin helps produce a hormone that narrows blood vessels and raises blood pressure
Reducing this hormone causes the blood vessels to widen and blood pressure to fall.

Possible side effects include:
diarrhea
dizziness
flu-like symptoms
fatigue
a cough
It is essential to read the packaging of any medication to check for interactions with other drugs.

Diet
Managing the diet can be an effective way of preventing and treating high blood pressure.

Plant-based foods
A nutritious, balanced diet includes plenty of fruits and vegetables, vegetable and omega oils, and good quality, unrefined carbohydrates, such as whole grains. People who include animal products in their diet should trim the fat off and avoid processed meats.

Lowering salt intake
Experts recommend reducing salt consumption and increasing potassium intake to manage or prevent high blood pressure. Limiting salt intake to less than 5–6 gramsTrusted Source per day could help improve cardiovascular health and reduce systolic blood pressure by 5.6 mm Hg in people with hypertension.

Nutritious fats
In moderation, plant-based sources of fats, such as avocados, nuts, olive oil, and omega oils, can provide benefits. People should limit their intake of saturated fats and trans fats, common in animal-sourced and processed foods.

The DASH diet
Health experts recommend the DASH diet for people with high blood pressure
The DASH diet focuses on an eating plan that emphasizes whole grains, fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, beans, and low fat dairy products

Food groups	
Number of weekly servings for those eating 1,600–3,100 calories a day	
Number of weekly servings for those on a 2,000-calorie diet
Grains and grain products 6–12	7–8
Fruits	3–6	3–5
Vegetables	4–6	4–5
Mostly low fat or nonfat dairy foods	2–4	2–3
Lean meat, fish, or poultry	1.5–2.5	2
Nuts, seeds, and legumes	3–6	4–5
Fats and candy	2–4.

Which foods are good for reducing blood pressure?
Alcohol
One study in women Trusted Source indicated that consuming some alcohol may help lower blood pressure
However, others reportTrusted Source the opposite, 
noting that even drinking a moderate amount might increase blood pressure levels
People who regularly drink more than moderate amounts of alcohol will almost always experience elevated blood pressure levels.

Caffeine
Studies into the relationship between caffeine and blood pressure have produced conflicting results
A report published in 2017 concluded that a moderate intake of coffee appears to be safe for people with high blood pressure.

Home remedies
The AHA recommends Trusted Source a range of lifestyle adjustments that can help reduce blood pressure, such as:
managing stress
quitting smoking
consuming a nutritious diet
getting exercise
following any treatment plan the doctor prescribes
Discuss any planned lifestyle changes with a healthcare professional before introducing them.

Regular exercise
The AHA notes that most healthy people should do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical exercise a week
This could be 30 minutes — or three sessions of 10 minutes a day — 5 days per week
This amount of exercise is also appropriate for those with high blood pressure
However, a person who has not exercised for a while or who has a new diagnosis should speak with their doctor before starting a new physical activity program to ensure it is suitable.

Losing weight
StudiesTrusted Source have revealed that losing as little as 5–10 pounds in weight can help reduce blood pressure
Weight loss will also improve the effectiveness of blood pressure medications
Methods of achieving and maintaining a moderate weight include getting regular exercise and following a diet that emphasizes plant-based foods
A person should also limit their intake of fat and added sugars
Learn about maintaining weight loss.

Sleep
Increasing sleep alone cannot treat hypertension, but too little sleep and reduced sleep quality may make it worse
A 2015 analysisTrusted Source of data from a Korean national health survey found that people who had under 5 hours of sleep per night were more likely to have hypertension.

Find more tips on how to manage high blood pressure.

Natural remedies
According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH), the following may help lowerTrusted Source blood pressure:
meditation, yoga, qi gong, and tai chi
biofeedback and transcendental meditation
supplements such as garlic, flaxseed, green or black tea, probiotics, cocoa, and roselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa)
However, the NCCIH adds that there is insufficient evidence to confirm that these can make a difference.

It also warns that some supplements can have adverse effects, such as raising blood pressure or interacting with medications, The organization states that meditation and exercise therapies are usually safe, but some poses may not be suitable for people with high blood pressure.

Anyone considering an alternative therapy should speak with their doctor first.

Get some tips for lowering blood pressure naturally
Diagnosis
There are different devices for measuring blood pressure, A doctor may use a digital device or a manual sphygmomanometer with a stethoscope, This has a pressure cuff that they put around the person’s arm
Digital blood pressure-measuring devices suitable for home use are also available for purchase online
A person will typically need more than one reading to confirm a diagnosis, as various factors can affect the result.

Blood pressure can fluctuate:
according to the time of day
during feelings of anxiety or stress
after eating
However, a doctor will take immediate action if a reading shows very high blood pressure or if there are signs of organ damage or other complications.

Additional tests
Other tests can help confirm a diagnosis, including those below
Urine and blood tests: These can check for underlying problems, such as a urine infection or kidney damage
Exercise stress test: A healthcare professional will measure a person’s blood pressure before, during, and after using a stationary bicycle or a treadmill, The results can give important clues about heart health,
Electrocardiogram (EKG): An EKG tests electrical activity in the heart. For a person with hypertension and high cholesterol levels, a doctor may order an EKG as a baseline for comparing future results, Changes in future results might show that coronary artery disease is developing or that the heart wall is thickening
Holter monitoring: For 24 hours, the individual carries an EKG portable device that connects to their chest through electrodes, This device can provide an overview of electrical activity in the heart throughout the day and show how it changes as the level of activity varies.

Dangers and side effects of hypertension
Healthy blood pressure is essential for maintaining bodily functions.

High blood pressure can have a severe effectTrusted Source on:
The cardiovascular system: High blood pressure can cause the arteries to harden, increasing the risk of a blockage,
The heart: A blockage can reduce blood flow to the heart, increasing the risk of angina, heart failure, or a heart attack,
The brain: A blockage in the arteries can lower or prevent blood flow to the brain, leading to a stroke
The kidneys: High blood pressure can result in kidney damage and chronic kidney disease
All of these effects can be life threatening.

Can you take decongestants?
Decongestants are a useful over-the-counter remedy when people have a stuffy or runny nose, but some can raiseTrusted Source blood pressure.

Ingredients that can have this effect include:
oxymetazoline
phenylephrine
pseudoephedrine
A person should explain to their pharmacist that they have high blood pressure and ask them to recommend a suitable option.

Is high blood pressure genetic?
The main risk factors for high blood pressure are likely to be environmental, but genetic factors may play a role, Hypertension can run in families, and people from certain ethnic and racial backgrounds appear to have a higher risk
However, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)Trusted Source note that individuals within a family often share similar lifestyles, such as dietary choices,
If a person has genetic factors that increase their susceptibility to high blood pressure, and they make lifestyle choices that increase this risk, they will likely have a greater chance of developing hypertension.

How much sodium per day?
The AHA recommendsTrusted Source that people limit their salt intake to no more than 2,300 milligrams (mg) a day and preferably reduce it to 1,500 mg. On average, individuals in the U.S. currently consume more than 3,400 mg of sodium daily
For example, the natural sodium content in vegetables is enough for most individuals’ bodily needs. With this in mind, avoiding the salt shaker and eating less processed and premade food are suitable ways to cut salt intake.

Complications
Without treatment or taking measures to manage blood pressure, excessive pressure on the artery walls can cause damage to the blood vessels, a form of cardiovascular disease. It can also damage vital organs.

Possible complications of high blood pressure include:
stroke
heart disease
heart attack
heart failure
peripheral arterial disease
aortic aneurysm
kidney disease
vascular dementia
Seeking early treatment and managing blood pressure can help prevent many health complications.

Risk factors
The risk factors Trusted Source for high blood pressure include the following:
Age: The risk increases with age because the blood vessels become less flexible
Family history and genetic factors: People who have close family members with hypertension are more likely to develop it
Obesity and having excess weight: People with overweight or obesity are more likely to develop high blood pressure
Physical inactivity: A sedentary lifestyle increases the risk
Smoking: When people smoke, the blood vessels narrow, and blood pressure rises, Smoking also reduces the blood’s oxygen content, so the heart pumps faster to compensate, which also increases blood pressure
Alcohol intake: Drinking a lot of alcohol increases the risk of blood pressure and its complications, such as heart disease
Diet: A diet high in unsaturated fat and salt increases the risk of high blood pressure
High cholesterol: Over 50%Trusted Source of people with high blood pressure have high cholesterol, Consuming nonnutritious fats can contribute to a buildup of cholesterol in the arteries
Mental stress: Stress can have a severe effect on blood pressure, especially when it is chronic, It can occur due to both socioeconomic and psychosocial factors
Stress: Persistent stress can lead to high blood pressure, It may also increase the likelihood of practices that can affect health, such as smoking or drinking
Diabetes: High blood pressure often occurs alongside diabetes, However, following a treatment plan to manage diabetes can reduce the risk, Learn more about hypertension and diabetes
Pregnancy: High blood pressure is more likely during pregnancy due to hormonal changes, Hypertension is also a symptom of preeclampsia, a potentially severe placental disorder
Sleep apnea: People with sleep apnea momentarily stop breathing while they sleep, Health experts suggest there are links with hypertension
Black Americans are 40% more likely to have hypertension and 30% more likely to die of heart disease than white Americans, studies show, A 2018 studyTrusted Source finds that one reason for this is unequal access to high quality cardiovascular healthcare.

When to speak with a doctor
Many people with high blood pressure do not have symptoms, For this reason, they must undergo regular screenings, especially those with a higher risk.

The USPSTF recommends annual screening for:
adults aged 40 years or older
those with an elevated risk of high blood pressure
individuals with a higher risk, including those who:
have high to typical blood pressure: 130–139 to 80–89 mm HgTrusted Source
have excess weight or obesity
are Black
Adults aged 18–39 years whose blood pressure is typical (less than 130/85 mm Hg) and who do not have other risk factors should have further screenings every 3–5 years,
If rescreening in the doctor’s office shows that blood pressure has risen, the USPSTF recommends using an ambulatory blood pressure monitor for 24 hours to assess blood pressure further. If this continues to show high blood pressure, the doctor will diagnose hypertension,
However, the USPSTF does not currently recommend routine screening for those aged 17 years and under.

Summary
High blood pressure is a potentially dangerous condition that often has no symptoms but can lead to a heart attack, stroke, and other life threatening conditions, Health experts define healthy blood pressure as lower than 120 over 80 mm HgTrusted Source,
Anyone who notices their blood pressure is 130–139 to 80–89 mm Hg from Trusted Source or above should speak with a doctor, It may indicate an underlying health issue, such as hyperthyroidism or kidney disease,
People should ask their doctor how often they should undergo blood pressure screenings, as many factors can affect their blood pressure and heart health.

